SCHOOL OF MATERIALS ENGINEERING

MS1016 THERMODYNAMICS OF MATERIALS

Tutorial 7 ­ GIBBS PHASE RULE AND PHASE DIAGRAM

Boltzmann's Constant              =  1.38 x 10-23 J/K

Avogadro's Constant               =  6.02 x 1023 /mol

1) Sketch a binary phase diagram of consisting of 2 elements that are totally
         dissolved in each other. Label the important points and explain your sketch.

                    Liq                 Melting point of B
                            L +a
Melting point of A
                              a

A                   Wt. % B          B

The phase diagram is characterized by a single phase, a because each element
is totally miscible to each other. For binary alloy when the 2 elements are
totally miscible, the enthalpy of mixture is exothermic (-ve). The bond between
the unlike elements is stronger than the like elements. The extra energy is
released and hence exothermic. The melting point of the mixture is higher than
the pure elements because of the stronger bonds.

2) Sketch a binary phase diagram of consisting of 2 elements that have limited
         solubility in each other. Label the important points and explain your sketch.
The phase diagram is usually characterized by an eutectic point. Such system
has higher energy between unlike elements and tend to separate into A-rich (a)
and B-rich (b) phases. Formation of bonds between unlike atoms requires heat
and therefore the process is endothermic (DHmix = +ve), resulting in an increase
in free energy. However mixing increases entropy and thus reducing Gibbs free
energy from the equation:

                           Gmix = DHmix - TDSmix

In order to minimize the Gibbs free energy, mixing in each component is up to
the solubility limit of the components in each other. The final structure will be
a mixture of a (A-rich phase + B dissolved) and b (B-rich phase + A dissolved).
The melting point of the mixture is lower than the pure elements because of the
weaker bonds.

              A-Rich Phase

B-Rich Phase

3) The figure below shows a binary phase diagram consisting of 2 metallic
         elements, A and B. The shaded region shows that the liquid phase and a solid
         phase (AB) exist in equilibrium. Describe what is this solid AB phase.
         The vertical line on the right of the shaded region represents a phase with a
         definite composition. This composition is 50%A and 50%B. The shaded region
         consists of the liquid phase in equilibrium with the solid phase. The composition
         of the liquid phase within the shaded region changes with temperature whereas
         the composition of the solid phase is constant. The solid phase is a compound
         of A and B. Phases with vertical lines represents compound or intermetallic.
         Examples are Fe3C, NiAl, Cu3Ag....

4) The Ag-Cu binary phase diagram is given below. For a composition contain
         50wt. % Cu, use the shaded lines to explain the following:

         (i) How the compositions of the phases (a and b) changes with temperature.
         (ii) How the solubility limit of Cu in Ag and Ag in Cu changes with

                temperature.
         (iii) Why does the liquid phase becomes more stable as the temperature

                  increases in term of the Gibbs free energy?

       A                 TB

                         X

       Composition of a     Composition of b

(i) When the temperature increases to point T, the horizontal line at point T
       intersects with the shaded line at points A and B. These 2 points represent
       the compositions of a and b phases respectively. Therefore as the
       temperature changes, the intersections of the horizontal line with the
       shaded lines changes correspondingly.

(ii) The shaded line represents the solubility limit of the 2 components in
       each other. It increases with temperature.

(iii)  G = H ­ TS

       At high temperature, the term TS becomes more prominent in reducing
       the Gibbs free energy. Transforming into liquid phase reduces the Gibbs
       free energy further as the entropy increases. At high temperatures above
       the melting point, the solid phases melts spontaneously.
5) Using Gibbs free energy curves of Fig. 1 to Fig. 5, sketch the phase diagram.
6)
